---
title: Vocabulary
---

Huion
-----

[Huion (Shenzhen Huion Animation Technology Co.,
LTD)](http://www.huion-tablet.com) is an enterprise which designs and
manufactures animation products and other handwritten input digitizer
products. Huion's main product line includes the USB Pen Tablet,
Wireless Pen Tablet, Signature Pad, Pen Tablet Monitor and LED Tracing
Board. The brand is present mainly in China (see their website in
Chinese at [www.huion.cn](http://www.huion.cn)) but since Huion's
foreign trade department was founded in 2000 it sells internationally as
well.

### Cooperation

Huion was contacted in May 2013 via email with enquiry about Linux
drivers for their model Huion 580. Jeny Chan from Huion replied
mentioning that a driver exists for Linux 3.0 but didn't specify if it
has been ever publicly released nor provided any instructions how such
driver could be obtained.

KYE
---

[KYE (KYE Systems Corporation)](http://www.kyecom.com/) is a DMS (design and
manufacturing service) company specializing mostly in HID (Human
Interface Device) devices, including graphics tablets. Established in
1983 and based in Taiwan, the company sells graphics tablets under its
[Genius](http://www.geniusnet.com/) brand name. Genius-branded tablets
also include rebranded UC-Logic and Waltop tablets.

### Cooperation

An attempt to contact KYE was done in the beginning of 2012, using the
"contact us" form on their web-site. A message was sent asking for
tablet samples and information. As of March 2012 no reply was received.

LPI
---

Lines per inch (LPI) is a unit used to measure tablet pen coordinate
sensing resolution. It represents the number of distinct pen positions a
tablet working area is able to sense within one inch in either
direction. Higher LPI along with higher [RPS](#rps) allow more
precise following of the pen movement and thus, smoother curves.

The tablets have the same resolution in either direction. However, [some
of them](/tablets "Waltop Media Tablet 14.1") may limit pen coordinates
to some number in both directions in compatibility modes, resulting in
different resolutions.

PL
--

Pressure levels (PL) is a number of distinct tip pressure force levels a
tablet pen is able to detect between no pressure and maximum detectable
pressure. The higher PL is, the smoother the pressure-controlled
gradients will be when drawing.

Rebranded tablets
-----------------

Some of the graphics tablet-designing companies rarely sell them under
their own names, but instead let other companies rebrand and sell them.
Two examples are UC-Logic and
Waltop. Rebranded models have essentially the same
hardware, but different logos on them and sometimes slightly different
cases. There are many companies selling rebranded tablets and they
rarely reveal the original designer and model name, so there are more
such tablets still to be found.

### Identifying original model

The USB vendor and product ID identify original tablet model. However,
very often, tablet identity could be guessed with high probability, by
comparing appearance and specifications.

Most of the "sold as" models listed on the [Tablet support
status]({{ site.baseurl }}/tablets) page and individual tablet
pages have been guessed that way. Such models have "" mark after their
name. If someone confirms the guess, the mark is removed. If the guess
is disproved, the tablet is removed from the "sold as" list and then, if
the correct original model becomes known, added to the appropriate one.

RPS
---

RPS (Reports per second) is a measure of tablet pen position report
rate. It represents the number of pen position reports a tablet is able
to send to the host PC per second.

Higher RPS along with higher [LPI](#lpi) allow more precise
following of the pen movement and thus, smoother curves. However, high
RPS means more data to process in a unit of time and may result in
drawing lag on low performance PCs running heavy-weight drawing
applications.

UC-Logic
--------

[UC-Logic (UC-Logic Technology Corporation)](http://www.uc-logic.com/) is an OEM
(Original Equipment Manufacturer) that specializes in designing and
manufacturing graphics tablets. Founded in 1996 and based in Taiwan, the
company distributes their products across the USA, Europe, Japan, China
and other places. The tablets designed by UC-Logic are sold by many
companies, including Genius, Aiptek, Monoprice and many others.

### Cooperation

An attempt to contact UC-Logic was done in the beginning of 2012, using
the "contact us" form on their web-site. A message was sent asking for
tablet samples and information. As of March 2012 no reply was received.

Waltop
------

[Waltop (Waltop International Corporation)](http://www.waltop.com/) is an OEM
(Original Equipment Manufacturer) that specializes in designing and
manufacturing graphics tablets. The company was founded in 2004 and is
based in Taiwan. The tablets designed by Waltop are sold by many
companies, including Genius, Trust, Aiptek, and many others.

### Cooperation

The DIGI*mend* project has contacted Waltop in the beginning of 2012 and
the company agreed to provide tablet samples and information. So far two
samples were received with possibly more to come.
