---
title: Digitizer Mending
---
The DIGImend project aims at improving Linux support for generic graphics
tablets. We work to provide kernel drivers, kernel and userspace driver fixes,
accompanying development, testing and end-user tools, documentation and
HOWTOs. 

Generic graphics tablets include ones designed and sold by Huion, KYE,
UC-Logic and Waltop, rebranded and sold by Aiptek, Genius, Monoprice,
Princeton, Trust, and many others. Essentially, any USB-connected tablets not
produced by Wacom. For the latter see [The Linux Wacom
Project](http://linuxwacom.sourceforge.net/).

The Mission
-----------

Wacom produces great tablets and Linux supports them quite well, but for many
people they're just too expensive. These include people who need a tablet only
occasionally, or just want to try using one. However, most importantly, these
include young people who have the talent, but can't afford the tools to
develop it.

You don't need a computer or a graphics tablet to become a great artist and
you may be better off starting without them, but computers enable so many
great techniques and make experimenting so much cheaper, not needing many
supplies.

Linux itself is free, runs on inexpensive hardware and supports lots of free
software with great capabilities. Take a look at what is possible with
free software and graphics tablets:

{% include video.html id="NeTYI4MFXdg" %}

{% include video.html id="YkNc0qjmkUc" %}

The cheaper tablets may be of lower quality, but they're still much more
comfortable and natural to use than mice or even touchscreens. Also, their
quality and features are constantly improving.

There are now tablets built with solid quality and battery-free pens that
detect tilting. Wireless tablets and tablets with programmable buttons and
multifunctional dials. And even 19" tablets with embedded displays - the likes
of Wacom Cintiq, but for $500. And they allow creating quite impressive art:

{% include video.html id="BPcjDcYmeY4" %}

The DIGImend project works to get affordable graphics tablets and software
into the hands of beginner and experienced artists alike.

How to Help
-----------

You can help the DIGImend project by helping users resolve their [issues on
GitHub](https://github.com/DIGImend/digimend-kernel-drivers/issues),
contributing new and updating old [HOWTOs](/support), [providing
comprehensive information](/support/howto/trbl/diagnostics) on unsupported
tablets, [improving this
website](https://github.com/DIGImend/digimend.github.io), contributing code to
our [drivers](/drivers) and [tools](/devel) and by contributing graphics tablet
hardware.

Last, but not least: consider becoming a patron of the project maintainer,
[Nikolai Kondrashov](https://www.patreon.com/spbnick), on
[Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/bePatron?c=930980), or
[Liberapay](https://liberapay.com/spbnick/donate), or just [buy him a
coffee](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/spbnick). Your support will help make
more tablets work on Linux!
